[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
How did the universe come to be?
What started it all?
Was there anything
before the universe?
In this episode, we explore
these age-old questions,
comparing both the scientific
and metaphysical cosmology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We are all familiar
with the dramatic words
of Genesis describing the
creation of heaven and Earth.
But long before the
Bible was ever written,
creation stories
have been a part
of every spiritual and shamanic
tradition throughout the world.
We yearn to understand this vast
universe and our place in it.
Most creation stories fall
under one of two types,
either the universe was
created from nothing
or it is eternal with
no beginning or end.
But as we'll see through the
union of modern astrophysics
and ancient mystery school
teachings of cosmology,
we can reconcile these
two contrasting views
and gain new insight into
the nature of the multiverse.
While many religions
placed Earth
at the center of creation,
this was not always
the dominant view.
For example, ancient hermetic
and alchemical teachings
said that the sun was the
center, while Mayan shamans had
a very precise and
complex astronomical
calendar that was based
on galactic cycles
around the Milky Way.
Scientific revolutions
in cosmology
began during the Renaissance.
Nicolaus Copernicus
used mathematics
to show the sun
should be the center.
Johannes Kepler
improved upon this
by proposing a sacred geometry
model of the solar system,
while Galileo conducted
many observations supporting
these ideas.
But it wasn't until
Isaac Newton formulated
his laws of motion
and gravitation
that the scientific revolution
was finally cemented in.
Well, we have all heard of
these great achievements.
What we are not usually told
is that all of these scientists
were initiates.
They studied the ancient
hermetic, alchemical,
and Pythagorean mystery
school teachings.
And it is from the
metaphysical arts and sciences
that these greats gained
their true insights.
How has cosmology changed
since the Renaissance era?
Progress didn't
really start happening
until the 20th century
when scientific cosmology
had a rebirth.
It kicked off with
Einstein's theory
of general relativity
that said space-time
is curved and dynamic.
Then as telescope
technology vastly improved,
Edwin Hubble was able to prove
that the universe is expanding
rather than static.
The universe was also shown to
be much bigger than we realized
with our solar
system being just one
tiny speck in the grand cosmos.
Then came the theories of the
Big Bang, inflation, and how
the heavier elements are made
in the inner cores of stars
and supernovae.
Now in the 21st century, a
new revolution in cosmology
is taking place as
we reignite our quest
for the stars through space
exploration and quantum
technologies.
We now have our sights
set upon the multiverse.
Scientists are
trying to find ways
to peer into parallel universes,
access higher dimensions,
and use wormholes to
travel through space-time.
But before we can
understand the multiverse,
let's first make sure we
understand this universe
that we live in.
How did our universe come to be?
Most of us have heard of today's
scientific model of the Big
Bang.
It says the universe started
with a great explosion
about 14 billion years ago.
How does this model compare
to ancient metaphysical
cosmologies?
One of the first metaphysical
accounts of creation
that really got my
attention, as a scientist,
was from the
tradition of Kabbalah.
The kabbalistic creation
stories remarkably
coincide with present
day Big Bang models.
The first Kabbalah
book I ever read
was a retranslation of
Genesis' chapter one
based on kabbalistic
understanding.
And at that same
time, I had also
been attending
astrophysics lectures
at the University of
Washington on modern cosmology.
And I remember thinking, wow,
they're saying the same things,
only Kabbalah goes
further into areas
that science can't yet reach.
I wondered what insights we
might gain from Kabbalah.
How might Kabbalah help
guide our investigations
and development of
new physics theories?
What was most astonishing
was that the Kabbalists
have had these insights for well
over 1,000 years, while science
has only just come around to
this point in the last 50 years
or so.
How do they relate?
To explore the correlation,
we can overlay the Big Bang
timeline onto the
kabbalistic tree of life.
Science tells us that the Big
Bang started with a quantum
fluctuation out of the vacuum.
As that fluctuation emerged
out of the quantum sea,
it became a center
point, a singularity that
was infinitely dense and tiny.
They called this the Planck era.
And at this point,
time did not exist.
The top of the tree of
life, known as the crown,
is this first instant
of the universe's birth.
It's the spark, the singularity.
And at this point, everything
is a unified, coherent whole.
All forces, particles,
and light are one.
What might this initial
state have been like?
Well, it's beyond
any known physics,
but mystics and scientists
alike describe it as total unity
where all is
absolute perfection.
Kabbalistically, we'd call
this the perfect "I am,"
or the center point of creation.
The second point on the
tree, called wisdom,
coincides with the initial
spark beginning to expand.
From the singularity,
all the quantum
potentials explode out in
what we call the Big Bang.
What was actually expanding
was space-time itself.
Now it's interesting
that the name Big Bang
was given for this expression.
Why is that?
Well, there was no literal
bang or physical sound made,
but there was an explosion of
force that caused a shattering.
What's meant by a shattering?
This idea comes up
several times in
both scientific and
kabbalistic cosmologies.
In Kabbalah, the primordial
vessel, or singularity,
had such intense
energy from source
flowing into it that it could no
longer contain all the energy.
Under this intensity,
the vessel shattered.
Sparks and shards
explode out everywhere.
A primordial chaos ensues.
To stop the catastrophe
from going too far,
a new form of order
needs to come in
to reorganize the potentials.
Source then initiates the
reformation of the tree of life
to its current arrangement.
How does this apply in science?
Well, scientists call the
shattering a phase change,
or a symmetry breaking.
What does that mean?
The simplest analogy
is to think of water.
In the liquid state, water
is uniform and smooth.
But as it cools to
freezing temperatures,
tiny ice crystals begin to form.
This is a phase change that
begins to break the uniformity.
When the water
completely freezes,
we can see cracks,
bubbles, and crystals.
The water symmetry
is then broken.
The molecules
rearrange themselves
into a new formation.
As they come into
this new order,
excess energy releases
and the system stabilizes.
What shatters at this step?
Unity itself is what shatters.
This first cause leads to
the expansion of space-time.
And according to Einstein's
general relativity,
space-time variations
are equivalent
to gravitational forces.
The unity force is
broken by this expansion
and gravity splits off
to become its own entity,
while the other forces
remain unified and symmetric.
This means all light and matter
are still unified and formless.
They call this the
Grand Unification Era,
but it lasts only a teeny,
tiny fraction of a second.
As space-time
expands, the quantum
potentials then flow in
to become an incredibly
hot, dense plasma of radiation.
What happens next?
The third point on the tree
of life, called understanding,
relates to the formation
of archetypal blueprints.
These are the
patterns and laws that
will govern all the
rest of creation.
In Kabbalah, this point
on the tree of life
has a very feminine
characteristic,
while the previous one had
more masculine aspects.
Here we can imagine a bunch of
fertilized seeds being planted
within the womb of space-time.
But at this point, the womb was
only the size of a single atom.
Physically, as the universe
continues to expand and cool,
it causes a second phase
change, or symmetry breaking.
This time, the unified
force splits into two,
separating the strong and
the electroweak forces that
govern nuclear interactions.
The strong force is
responsible for building quarks
together to form particles,
like protons and neutrons,
as well as to bind
those particles together
to form nuclei.
The electroweak force
is the unification
of electromagnetic
and weak forces
that govern the interactions
of charged particles
and nuclear decay.
Scientists call this
the Electroweak Era.
The second phase change also
causes density fluctuations,
or tiny domains to form.
What does that mean?
It means that rather
than being perfectly
smooth, right from
the beginning,
there are variations.
Now why is this important?
Those tiny fluctuations
became like cosmic seeds.
Again, we can imagine the
feminine womb being impregnated
by the masculine seed.
And we might also think of
them as alchemical vessels
in a cosmic laboratory.
Inside these vessels, the future
stars, solar systems, galaxies,
and other cosmic
structures would
be synthesized, including the
elements that we are made of.
What's more, the
expansion and distribution
of these fluctuations took
on a fractal behavior.
What do we mean by fractal here?
It means that it is
a pattern that is
repeated at almost every scale.
And this establishes the
first archetypal forms.
With this third point
on the tree of life,
we form the first sacred
geometry of the triangle
and establish the
roots of the three
pillars of masculine force,
feminine form, and unity,
or balance.
The dynamic dance of energy
between these three pillars
is the generative
system of all creation.
This is the formula.
The rest of the tree simply
duplicates this pattern.
These first three
steps all happen
in less than a teeny,
tiny fraction of a second
after the Big Bang.
Even though we may describe
them as separate steps,
they are really all one.
Now what usually happens after
the pregnant womb expands
to a certain point?
It's time to give birth.
In this case, the
birthing is what science
calls the Inflationary Era.
The infant universe
suddenly and very rapidly
inflates from about 1
nanometer in diameter,
which is half the
width of a DNA helix,
up to 100 trillion
kilometers across.
Space-time expanded faster
than the speed of light
for a tiny fraction of a second.
What did that cause?
Well, first, a huge amount
of energy was released.
A true vacuum was established.
And a third final
symmetry breaking occurs.
This time, it was
a big shattering.
Scientifically, the
so-called Higgs field froze
and the electromagnetic and
weak forces also separate out.
Prior to this point,
the hot plasma
of particles,
light, and radiation
was still rather homogeneous
and undifferentiated.
After this third
shattering, particles
gained mass, charge, spin,
and other characteristics
that defined them uniquely.
The Higgs field is what
scientists currently
believe is the cause
of mass in particles,
while the electromagnetic
fields govern interactions
between charged particles.
And the weak force is the
mediator of nuclear decay,
like what happens in
radioactive materials.
Kabbalistically, we can
equate this final shattering
to the creation of the
abyss on the tree of life.
The abyss is this great divide
between the universe we know
and the supernal
realm of unification.
It's like a rip in
the fabric of space
that distorts
everything that happens
below or after the abyss.
We can also think of what
happens to white light
when it shines through a prism.
That light then separates
out into a spectrum
of diverse colors.
The universe appears
very different
above and below this
final shattering.
Above is the realm of
supersymmetry and unity.
Below is the world we know.
After this final shattering,
the whole process
slows down dramatically.
This next part of
the story correlates
with the sphere of mercy, or
love, on the tree of life.
This sphere has to do
with limitless light
and establishing the laws of
order in the physical universe.
Standard model quantum physics,
the four physical forces,
and the laws of nature
that we are more familiar
with kick in here.
Subatomic particles
and antiparticles
begin to form and then
annihilate within the plasma,
producing high-energy photons
that dominate this era.
This could be considered a
"let there be light" moment.
By one second
after the Big Bang,
only a small
percentage of particles
survive to become the eventual
building blocks of matter.
The fact that any
particle survived at all
is because there must
have been more particles
than antiparticles.
But why that would be
so is a big mystery
scientists still
don't understand.
It's a very fortunate
mystery, for us
at least, because if it
hadn't been this way,
then nothing would have
survived in the early universe
except photons of light.
Kabbalistically,
though, we might
wonder if some of
those antiparticles
could have fallen into the
abyss in the previous step,
while the regular particles were
transmitted across the abyss
to be formed into the
universe we see today.
If that's the case,
then there must
have been some plan guiding
the creative process.
Next comes the sphere
of severity, or power.
This one is about placing
limits upon the limitless light.
It begins to form and restrict
things according to the laws.
This begins with what
scientists call nucleosynthesis
and what I call cosmic alchemy.
The strong force binds
protons and neutrons
together through
fusion producing
mostly hydrogen, helium,
and a little lithium atoms.
These first atoms
form into clouds
of hot ionized plasma
that begin to accumulate
in those alchemical vessels
of higher mass density.
This forms the beginnings
of nebulae and galactic
superstructures.
This also marks the
shift from photons
to matter being the main
driver of the macrocosm.
All the stages described
so far happened
within about the first 10
seconds after the Big Bang.
After this first 10 seconds,
the Photon Era dominates
and the universe remains
this hot and opaque plasma
for hundreds of
thousands of years.
It's not until 377,000
years after the Big Bang
that another significant
shift occurs.
Here, the temperature finally
dropped enough for electrons
to bind with atoms
for the first time,
becoming neutral in charge.
This then cleared
the way for photons
to freely flow through space,
unimpeded for the first time.
At this point, the universe
becomes transparent to light.
Initially, this radiation would
have been visible to the eye
as a pale yellow-orange color.
But with expansion and
cooling, the frequency
has dropped to the radio
wave range by today.
These photons however,
still carry information
about the early universe.
This forms what is called the
cosmic microwave background
radiation.
And scientists have been imaging
this afterglow from the Big
Bang with increasing
precision, giving us
a glimpse into the fundamental
structure of the universe.
All in all, the density
fluctuation maps
validate the predictions made
by Big Bang inflation models.
How does this event line
up with the tree of life?
Well, this point
corresponds very nicely
with the center of the tree
of life known as beauty, which
happens to be yellow in color.
It's about balance
and it shows us
the image of the original
spark that initiated
the whole creation process.
The next significant
step brings us
to victory on the tree
of life at the bottom
of the pillar of force.
Hundreds of millions of years
after the Big Bang, gravity
forms the earliest
galaxies and stars.
The stars again, are
the alchemical furnaces
that fuse the heavier
elements up to iron,
including the elements
necessary for life.
After a few million years,
the first generation
stars explode as supernova,
forming even heavier elements
beyond iron and
seeding the universe
for later generations of
stars, galaxies, and clusters
of galaxies.
This epic lasts about
one billion years
after the Big Bang.
About 8 billion years
later, newer stars
attract cosmic dust and
space rocks into their field.
These ultimately form into
the planets and solar systems
we see today.
Our Earth, which is about
4.5 billion years old,
formed during this time.
And we can correlate
this formation
of planets and solar systems
to the sphere known as glory
on the tree of life,
which sits at the bottom
the pillar of form.
As we again come to the
middle pillar of the tree
to a sphere known as
foundation, the universe's
macrocosmic behavior
shifts a third time.
Originally, photons dominated.
Then matter took over and
gravity slowed down expansion.
But as expansion continued,
this effect diminished.
At about 9.8 billion
years after the Big Bang,
the expansion of the universe
began to speed up again.
This baffled scientists.
What's causing the acceleration?
It's some kind of mysterious
anti-gravity field
that scientists have
labeled dark energy.
On the tree of life, this
point where that dark energy
starts to speed up the
expansion of the universe
again corresponds to the
foundation of the universe.
And in Kabbalah, foundation
relates to the will.
The final step in our
cosmological journey
is the birth of life.
This brings us to the bottom of
the middle pillar on the tree
into a sphere known as
the kingdom of Earth.
All the energies and
elements from the universe
funnel down into
this last sphere,
manifesting the fruit
that was originally
contained within the seed.
Just as the universe
began in a hot plasma,
life is thought to have begun
in a hot primordial soup
beginning with macromolecules,
then RNA and DNA.
And over the last 3
billion years or so,
evolving and transforming
towards more advanced life
forms.
And here we are today,
13.8 billion years
after the Big Bang.
In our new story of creation,
there is one big question
that scientists
still struggle with--
what started it all?
What happened before
the beginning?
Religion says God started it.
Metaphysics and
mystical teachings
reach deeper than that.
In Kabbalah, the
source of oneness
that initiated the spark and
emanated the tree of life
is called Ein Sof.
This name means infinite,
perfect, and without end.
It is everywhere and nowhere,
kind of like the Dow.
When Kabbalists refer
to Ein Sof as God,
we are saying everything is
divine because Ein Sof is
in everything.
There is nowhere
that it cannot be.
In alchemy and hermetics,
there's a similar concept.
The one mind acts
upon prima materia,
which can be equated
to the quantum vacuum.
Similarly, in the Upanishads,
the Brahma acts upon Akasha.
Even in quantum physics,
we've established
that observation is central
to manifesting things out
of the quantum vacuum.
So some original observer,
an infinite eternal being,
must have existed
before the beginning
of our physical universe.
We can call it whatever we want,
so long as we acknowledge it
because that is source.
And remember, that
source is in us.
Kabbalah says the
essence of Ein Sof
flows through the whole tree.
Even though we might perceive
a diverse spectrum of colors,
the light is all from one
source and of one essence.
This whole cosmology
of Kabbalah, of course,
traces the cause
of creation back
to a divine source, the Ein Sof.
Some scientists today would
like to invoke the many worlds'
interpretation of
quantum mechanics
to eliminate the need for an
original observer, or source.
They say that in a multiverse,
all possible universes
are being created
constantly and there
is no need for a divine source.
But metaphysics also
works with the idea
of multiverses and
parallel worlds
while still including
universal consciousness,
or eternal spirit, into
the infinite multiverse.
After all, Ein Sof is
eternal and infinite.
Its home is the multiverse.
But again, before we can hope
to understand the multiverse,
we must first understand
this universe we live in.
And as much as the scientists
have tried to do this,
they still don't
understand what makes up
the majority of our universe.
All the matter and light that
we've discussed and described
so far makes up less
than 5% of our universe.
How can anyone possibly
claim that spirit,
or some divine source, doesn't
exist when they don't even
know what most our
universe is made of?
Through a combination of
astrophysics observations
in the last couple of
decades, scientists
have had to face the fact that
less than 5% of the universe
is made of ordinary matter.
They have spent
their entire careers
on trying to understand
this matter only
to discover that the
majority of the universe
is made of something
else entirely.
According to the latest data
from the Planck satellite,
which precisely measured the
cosmic microwave background
radiation left over from
the Big Bang, less than 5%
is ordinary matter,
like the kinds addressed
in the standard
model of physics,
while 27% is what
they call dark matter,
and the other 68% is
called dark energy.
What are these dark things that
make up 95% of our universe?
First, let's establish,
why are they called dark?
They're called dark because they
don't produce any photons thus,
we can't directly observe them
through our current methods.
We can only infer
their presence based
on other observations,
especially in relation
to gravity and the expansion
rate of our universe.
Let's start with dark matter.
How do we know it exists?
The primary evidence comes
from observations of galaxies.
A couple of maverick
astronomers were
measuring rotational
speeds of galaxies,
including our own Milky Way.
They noticed that the galaxies
were moving so fast that they
should fly apart.
The only way to
account for this is
that they must have
more mass or something
holding them together.
Calculations
showed, for example,
that the Milky Way should be
10 times more massive to rotate
the way it does.
This means 90% of
the Milky Way's mass
was due to dark matter.
These observations
have been confirmed
by other types of
measurements, as well,
and scientists are
quite confident, by now,
that dark matter exists.
The question is, what is it?
Some of it could be ordinary
matter that is just very dim,
such as burned out
stars and black holes.
But the leading
proposals say that it
must be some kind of elusive
new form of elementary particles
yet to be discovered.
They must be massive to have
such strong gravitational
effects.
Yet they must also
be weakly interacting
with all other forms of
matter in all other ways.
String theorists
have proposed that it
is a type of supersymmetric
particle called a neutralino.
It's predicted to
have mass, no charge,
and is weakly interacting.
And their calculations
show that it
could account for the
whole 27% of dark matter,
but the jury is still out.
Whatever it is, it is crucial to
helping the stars and galaxies
form and stay together.
Experts believe it is
ubiquitous in the universe
and that it has a strong
influence on cosmic structure
and evolution.
The other thing that
had a critical role
in helping form the
cosmic structure
and determine where the stars
and galaxies have their birth
was those density fluctuations
from the early universe.
These functioned like alchemical
vessels in a cosmic laboratory
or like those little wombs
in the fabric of space-time.
Could dark matter
be related to these?
If so, that would mean it
has a more feminine quality
of contraction, or
formation, according
to kabbalistic principles.
What about dark energy?
What is this mysterious thing
that makes up almost 70%
of our universe?
Since the 1990s, astronomers
have discovered and confirmed
that the expansion of the
universe is speeding up.
Measurements have estimated
that when the universe was half
its present age, there was a
shift in the expansion rate.
It went from slowing
down due to gravity
to gradually speeding up.
There must be some
form of energy
causing this acceleration.
Scientists have labeled
this dark energy
because they can't
measure it directly.
So dark energy is an
energy of expansion.
It's like the pressure that
causes a balloon to inflate.
We can think of matter
and its gravitational pull
as being contractive, or it
puts on the brakes to expansion,
while dark energy is
like the gas pedal.
Where is dark energy
located in the universe?
It's everywhere.
It is thought to uniformly
permeate all of space.
Unlike dark matter, it
doesn't accumulate anywhere
in particular thus, its
density is very low, much less
than the density of matter
found within galaxies.
But because it uniformly
fills empty space,
this subtle energy can have
a profound collective effect
on the universe as a whole.
What do scientists think it is?
The most likely
candidate is that it
is the energy of the quantum
vacuum in empty space,
the zero-point energy.
The main debate is whether
it is a scalar field
or a cosmological constant.
The cosmological
constant was first
introduced by Einstein in 1917.
Since E equals mc squared,
general relativity
predicts that a non-zero
vacuum energy should
have a gravitational effect.
However, Einstein
abandoned this idea
of the cosmological constant,
calling it his biggest blunder.
Guess what, Einstein?
You shouldn't have been
so quick to dismiss it.
The main difference between
the cosmological constant
and a scalar field hypothesis
is whether the energy density
is homogeneous and
constant or whether it
varies in space and time.
One dynamic scalar
field proposed
has been called quintessence.
The latest results of
the Planck satellite
say there's no evidence of
a dynamically varying dark
energy.
However, what if
this dark energy
is from the same
source that caused
the inflationary period of the
Big Bang 14 billion years ago?
We learned that in
the first fraction
of a second after the Big
Bang, space-time exponentially
expanded to enormous size.
That required a very high
energy density at the time.
The energy driving
inflation didn't just
disappear all of a sudden.
What happened to it?
Could it be that as
space-time expanded so rapidly
that it also diluted this
energy density somehow?
It's possible that the dark
energy we measure today
is the same energy of expansion
that caused inflation.
It might only appear
to be constant to us
now in a similar way
that space-time appears
to be flat to us, meaning it
shows no overall curvature,
even though it started out
as a tiny spherical bubble.
Scientists are not
sure if there's
any relation between dark
energy and inflation,
but their expansive natures sure
are reminiscent of one another.
Could this quintessence,
the energy of the vacuum,
be harnessed?
Nikola Tesla sure thought
so and wrote extensively
on this topic.
He was devoted to finding ways
to tap into this energy source.
Tesla said that if
we could harness
the energies of the vacuum,
"We would have powers almost
unlimited and supernatural."
Metaphysically, what might
we relate this energy to?
Recall the quantum
vacuum relates
to the space between things.
It's the gap, that blank
canvas, or empty space,
upon which all objects
are painted or observed.
It's the background
to everything.
The gap is a portal
through which source energy
enters into our universe.
It's what triggered the
Big Bang and its inflation.
It's what's causing our current
expansion rate to speed up.
And it's everywhere, including
inside the atoms of our bodies.
Could this energy
of expansion be
the will of Ein Sof pushing
against the unmanifest?
Could that Ein
Sofic source be what
is driving progression
and expansion onwards?
I believe so.
In this episode, we've worked
our way from the oneness
to diversity through the Big
Bang and cosmology models.
That diversity came from
various shatterings,
or symmetry breaking, through
the process of creation.
Do these physical
shatterings mean
that we are separate from
source and each other?
While we may experience
separation at a physical level,
we are not just physical.
We are spirit.
Separation is
mostly a perception.
This world of diverse
forms is about the world
of sensory perception.
Even though we might perceive
a spectrum of colors,
the light is all from one
source and is of one essence.
Remember, the essence of Ein
Sof flows through the whole tree
that includes matter and mind.
So, no, we are not
really separate
because spirit is
infinite eternal oneness.
It is in all things and
it connects all things.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]